# Project Vesta: COVID-19 detection from chest radiography

For a full writeup visit my [personal website](https://hectorcarrion.com/home/vesta).

## Abstract

*The COVID-19 pandemic continues to disrupt our healthcare systems, well-being and way of life. As the virus threatens the entire population across the globe, it has become apparent that a critical near-term step towards defeating the virus is large-scale, wide-spread, easily accessible, rapid testing. One key screening approach could be chest radiography, given the hardware’s availability worldwide and low operating costs. Early studies have shown that COVID-19 patients present characteristic abnormalities in chest radiography images such as X-Ray and CT scans. This has motivated research towards developing artificial intelligence systems based on deep learning that can detect the virus infection automatically. Results have been promising, but a lot of the work is closed source and not much COVID-19 X-Ray data is available to all. Furthermore, the work (to the best of my knowledge) has focused mostly on traditional transfer learning from ImageNet data. Therefore, in this study I introduce Vesta an open sourced image classifier capable of detecting COVID-19 infections. Vesta is based on a modern convolutional DenseNet architecture that has been pre-trained on the ChestX-ray8 dataset containing 108,948 frontal-view X-Ray images of 32,717 unique patients covering 14 (non COVID-19) pathological conditions. The classifier was re-trained and fine-tuned on a smaller resampled dataset containing nearly 2,500 images, 251 of which are COVID-19. The body of work will be open sourced and the data sources shared, the medically relevant evaluation metrics will also be clearly laid out and explained. Additionally, in order to improve the explainability of the model and to highlight determining factors in COVID-19 detection, I will be using GradCAM based heat maps to determine areas of interest relevant to diagnosis. Finally, it’s important to emphasize that this is not a production-ready solution, it’s development has been done with a very limited COVID-19 dataset, the results are preliminary and nothing conclusive should be inferred. I am not a health professional or epidemiologist and I have not conducted a clinical trial on the approach. The hope is that by openly sharing the work, writing easy-to-follow code and expanding on the COVID-19 knowledge base, it may help researchers, data scientists, students and others accelerate our collective progress towards defeating the virus.*

https://hectorcarrion.com/home/vesta
